GalaChain SDK v2 (#368)
GalaChain/sdk: BREAKING_CHANGES.md

# Breaking Changes in GalaChain SDK Major Releases

## Introduction

Welcome to the breaking changes documentation for GalaChain SDK major releases.
This document outlines the significant changes that may affect users upgrading to a new major version of the library.
These changes are considered breaking as they may require modifications to existing codebases to maintain compatibility.

By following this documentation, users can effectively manage the upgrade process and ensure smooth transitions to newer versions of the GalaChain SDK.
If you have any questions or need further assistance, please refer to the GalaChain SDK documentation or reach out to the community for support.

## Version 2.0.0

The version contains various breaking changes in terms of how authorization is handled, how transactions are signed, and how the API is structured.
However, it is backward compatible with the previous version in terms of the current chaincode state.
The changes are mostly related to the way the SDK is used and how the chaincode is structured.

> If you have current production chain, you don't need to update the data, but you may need to update the code to be compatible with the new version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a current production chain: You don't need to update the data, but you may need to update the code to be compatible with the new version.
```

The only exception is the authorization, which requires a migration of the roles from `allowedOrgs` to `allowedRoles`, and setting up the roles for some user profiles.

### Removal of Deprecated Features
- `createAndSignValidDTO` was removed in favor of `createValidDTO(...).signed(...)`.

### Changes to API Contracts

#### Different way of handling authorization

Since 2.0.0 we support role-based auth, described in detail here, and we changed how `@GalaTransaction`, `@Submit`, and `@Evaluate` handle transactions.
The most important breaking change is that all methods that update the chain need to be signed.
We no longer support writing to the chain without a signature.

Please, ensure that all methods that update the chain are signed (`@GalaTransaction` has `verifySignature: true` property, or `@Submit`, or `@Evaluate` is used, which enforce signature verification).

> Additionally, we deprecated `allowedOrgs` property in decorator in favor of `allowedRoles` only, and encourage users to migrate to the new approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, we deprecated the `allowedOrgs` property in the transaction decorators in favor of `allowedRoles`. We encourage users to migrate to the new approach.
```

> As a backward compatibility measure, we still support `allowedOrgs` for now, but we don't allow to combine `allowedOrgs` and `allowedRoles` in the same decorator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a backward compatibility measure, we still support `allowedOrgs` for now, but we don't allow combining both `allowedOrgs` and `allowedRoles` within the same decorator.
```

The migration steps from `allowedOrgs` to `allowedRoles` are as follows:
1. Verify which users should have access to the method, and what roles they should have.

>    For instance, if you have a curator-like organization for privileged access, like `allowedOrgs: ["CuratorOrg"]`, you may want to designate a `CURATOR` role and assign it to the users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For instance, if you have a curator-like organization for privileged access, like `allowedOrgs: ["CuratorOrg"]`, you may want to designate a `CURATOR` role and assign it to the applicable users.
```

2. Assign roles to the users, using the `PublicKeyContract:UpdateUserRoles` method.
   You need to provide the full list of roles for the user, as the method replaces the existing roles with the new ones.
3. Ensure that your custom client code for user registration assigns the correct roles.
   Registration methods from the `PublicKeyContract` assign `EVALUATE` and `SUBMIT` as default roles, but you may want additional ones.
4. Update the contract method decorators to use `allowedRoles` instead of `allowedOrgs`.

> Probably for most users you won't need to do anything, as the default roles are `EVALUATE` and `SUBMIT`, which are sufficient for calling methods with no `allowedRoles` specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For most users, you probably won't need to do anything, as the default roles are `EVALUATE` and `SUBMIT`.  These roles alone are sufficient for calling methods with no `allowedRoles` specified.
```

> You may want to consult our acceptance test for migration from `allowedOrgs` to `allowedRoles` for more details, see [PublicKeyContract.migration.spec.ts](chaincode/src/contracts/PublicKeyContract.migration.spec.ts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may want to consult our acceptance test for migration from `allowedOrgs` to `allowedRoles`. For more details, see [PublicKeyContract.migration.spec.ts](chaincode/src/contracts/PublicKeyContract.migration.spec.ts).
```

  .savedState(nftClass, nftInstance, balance);

const dto = await createValidSubmitDTO(LockTokenDto, { ... })
  .signed(users.testUser1.privateKey);

const response = await contract.LockToken(ctx, dto);

expect(getWrites()).toEqual(expectedWrites);
```

The main difference between the old CA-based auth and the new signature-based auth is that instead of using the user's CA (Certificate Authority) identity, we use the user's public key that is recovered from the DTO (Data Transfer Object) and the signature.
We use the public key as a unique identifier of the user.

In the previous flow we were using `callingUser` to set the user, and the user was identified by the CA identity.
In the new flow we use `registeredUsers` to save relevant `UserProfile` objects in the mocked chain state, and the user is authenticated on the basis of the signature.
This is why in the code for the new version we use `signed` to sign the DTO with the user's private key.

The `callingUser()` function is still supported, but it should be used for low-level stuff, when you don't call contract methods directly.
The parameter it takes is the user's object, as opposed to the alias, which was used previously.

> It is done on purpose to allow you to detect if you need to update the code for the new version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is done this way on purpose to allow you to detect if you need to update the code for the new version.
```

> Additionally, `writes` property was changed to `allWrites`, and we recommend to use a new `getWrites()` function, which returns the writes in the form of a dictionary, but skips low-level writes that are not relevant for the test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, the `writes` property was changed to `allWrites`, and we recommend developers use a new `getWrites()` function. It returns the writes in the form of a dictionary, but skips low-level writes that are not relevant for the test.
```

> By default, it skips the keys of `UniqueTransaction` objects, which are used for enforcing the `uniqueKey` field in the DTOs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, `getWrites()` skips the keys of `UniqueTransaction` objects, which are used for enforcing the `uniqueKey` field in the DTOs.
```

> This behavior can be altered by providing custom `skipKeysStartingWith: string[]` parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This behavior can be altered by providing a custom `skipKeysStartingWith: string[]` parameter.
```

#### Enforcing dto.uniqueKey for each submit transactions

Starting from version `2.0.0` we enforce the `uniqueKey` field in each DTO that is used in `@Submit` or `@GalaTransaction({ type: SUBMIT })` methods.

> This was done to prevent duplicate transactions from being submitted to the chain, and from the replay attacks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This prevents duplicate transactions from being submitted to the chain, and protects against replay attacks.
```

> Once you submit a DTO with missing `uniqueKey`, the SDK will throw a validation error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any time you submit a DTO with a missing `uniqueKey`, the SDK will throw a validation error.
```

> Once you submit a DTO with a `uniqueKey` that was already used, the SDK will throw a conflict error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you submit a DTO with a `uniqueKey` that was already used, the SDK will throw a conflict error.
```

> It is recommended to use `@Submit` decorator for all transactions that update the chain, as it enforces the signature verification, and the `uniqueKey` field in the DTOs by enforcing `SubmitCallDTO` as parent DTO class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended to use the `@Submit` decorator for all transactions that update the chain, as it enforces both the signature verification and the `uniqueKey` field in the DTOs. This is accomplished by enforcing `SubmitCallDTO` as the parent DTO class.
```

> In order to make the creation of the `uniqueKey` easier, we added additional method for creating DTOs with `uniqueKey`, aside from the `createValidDTO` method and with similar syntax:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to make the creation of the `uniqueKey` easier, we added an additional method, aside from `createValidDTO`, for instantiating DTOs with `uniqueKey` properties. The new method ( `createValidSubmitDTO`) uses a similar syntax:
```

```typescript
const dto = await createValidSubmitDTO(DtoClass, { ... }).signed(...);
```

Additionally, we added a utility method for creating a unique key, which can be used in the DTOs:

```typescript
const uniqueKey = createUniqueKey();
```

#### Unification of TokenBalance class API

We unified the API of the `TokenBalance` class, which is used for storing the token balances in the chain state.
Previously, the methods of `TokenBalance` class separated validation and mutation of the balance, which led to verbose syntax (e.g. `balance.ensureCanAddInstance(...).add()`).
Now, the methods are unified, and the validation is done in the relevant methods (e.g. `balance.addInstance(...)`).

> This way we prefer clean code over SRP (Single Responsibility Principle) in this case, and we unify the api with different classes that are used for the chain state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this way, we prefer clean code over SRP (Single Responsibility Principle) and we unify the api with different classes that are used for the chain state.
```

The change impacts chaincode code only.

#### Bidirectional aliases and strong validation for user related fields

> Starting from version `2.0.0` we enforce strong validation for user related fields in the DTOs, and chain objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting from version `2.0.0` we enforce strong validation for user related fields in the DTOs and chain objects.
```

There are two types of user related fields:

> - User alias (`UserAlias`), which is a unique identifier of the user, and is used in objects saved on chain and in the majority of methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- User alias (`UserAlias`), which is a unique identifier of the user stored in objects saved on chain and processed within the majority of methods.
```

>   Chain user has a single unique alias (like `client|abc`, or `eth|<checksumed-addr>`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Chain users each have a single unique alias (like `client|abc`, or `eth|<checksumed-addr>`).
```

> - User reference (`UserRef`), which is a reference to the user object, and is used in the DTOs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- User reference (`UserRef`), which is a reference to the user object and is used in the DTOs.
```

  User reference unambiguously identifies the user, but a single user can have multiple references (for instance all `client|abc`, checksumed eth address, and lower-cased eth address can refer to the same user).

Respectively, we have two new validation/serialization decorators: `@IsUserAlias` and `@IsUserRef`, and functions for casting and validation: `asValidUserAlias`, and `asValidUserRef`.

`UserRef` can be resolved to `UserAlias` using the `resolveUserAlias` function.

> This is useful when for instance you have and ethereum address, and you want to resolve it to the user alias of the registered user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is useful when, for instance, you have an ethereum address, and you want to resolve it to the user alias of the registered user.
```

> Prior to version `2.0.0` user related fields were string fields with no additional validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior to version `2.0.0`, user related fields were string fields with no additional validation.
```

> This change affects mostly the DTOs, and the chain objects that have user related fields, and the methods that use them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change primarily affects the DTOs, the chain objects that have user related fields, and the methods that use them.
```
